1. What is Ansible? Why is it used in Linux administration?
Ansible is an open-source configuration management, application deployment, and automation tool. It's agentless and uses SSH for communication.
For Linux admins, it simplifies tasks like software updates, user management, and enforcing configuration consistency across servers.

2. What does “idempotency” mean in Ansible?
Idempotency ensures that running a playbook multiple times will have the same result as running it once. For example, installing a package will not reinstall it if it's already installed.

3. How do you check if the last task succeeded or failed?
Ansible automatically tracks task success/failure using return codes. You can also check using:
- name: Check result
  debug:
    var: result.rc
Or use failed_when and changed_when conditions.

4. How do you reboot a server only if the kernel was updated?
- name: Check current kernel
  command: uname -r
  register: running_kernel

- name: Get latest installed kernel
  shell: rpm -q --last kernel | head -n1 | awk '{print $1}' | sed 's/kernel-//'
  register: latest_kernel

- name: Reboot only if kernel changed
  reboot:
    msg: "Rebooting due to kernel update"
  when: running_kernel.stdout != latest_kernel.stdout

5. How do you manage sensitive variables in Ansible?
Use Ansible Vault:
ansible-vault encrypt secrets.yml
ansible-playbook site.yml --ask-vault-pass

6. How would you structure a playbook for patching and validation?
Answer:

Pre-check → Patch → Reboot (if needed) → Post-check → Compare

Sample steps:
- name: Run pre-check script
  shell: /root/pre.sh
  register: precheck

- name: Apply patches
  yum:
    name: '*'
    state: latest

- name: Run post-check script
  shell: /root/post.sh

7. What is the difference between shell, command, and script modules?
command: safest, no shell features.
shell: allows shell features (like pipes, redirects).
script: runs a local script on remote nodes.

8. How do you apply tasks to only one group in the inventory?
- hosts: db_servers
  tasks:
    - name: Install MariaDB
      yum:
        name: mariadb
        state: present

9. What are handlers in Ansible?
Handlers run only if notified. Useful for restarting services after config changes.
- name: Update config
  copy:
    src: nginx.conf
    dest: /etc/nginx/nginx.conf
  notify: Restart nginx

handlers:
  - name: Restart nginx
    service:
      name: nginx
      state: restarted

10. How do you test an Ansible playbook safely?
Use --check (dry run)
Use --diff to see changes
Limit scope with --limit or tags

📁 Bonus: Real-World Task to Explain in Interviews
“We automated OS patching across 300 RHEL servers using Ansible. The playbook included pre-checks, controlled reboot only if the kernel changed, and post-check comparisons.
We used Ansible Tower for scheduling and visibility.”
